Diptodas 799 fall final (#11)
compusciencing/compusciencing.github.io: _posts/2018-12-11-dipto-csc-799-report.md

---
layout: post
title:  "CSC 799 Final Report"
categories: ["Missouri State University"]
tags: ["csc799", "topic modeling", "word embedding", "tone analyze", "t-test"]
author: "Dipto Das"
---

# CSC 799 Final Report

**Student: Dipto Das**

**Supervisor: Dr. Anthony J. Clark**

My research can be described in the broad area of social media content classification. For this semester, I focused on text classification. Text classification is basically an NLP problem. Popular NLP techniques include stemming, stop word elimination, sentiment analysis, and etc. A very popular algorithm often used in text analysis is topic modeling.

# Topic Modeling

> In machine learning and natural language processing, topic modeling is a type of statistical model for discovering the abstract "topics" that occur in a collection of documents. Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) is a very popular algorithm to find the topic model of a collection of documents. From David Blei and Andrew Ng's pioneering paper on LDA, it makes two basic assumptions:

Reviewer: Add a link to the Blei et al. paper.

Let's see a very popular example.

If we know a pair of words that are from same group like (man, king) and we want to get a similar pair where we know one entry like this: (woman, ?).

A standard word embedding model would suggest a like queen as the answer. Because it is the closest word that can replace king when woman replace the word man.

Something like this: queen = (king - man) + woman

Popular word embedding models include word2vec model by Google, GloVe by Stanford. There are some unconventional word embedding models available as well like urban dictionary model.

Download links for the pretrained
* GoogleNews word2vec model:  https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B7XkCwpI5KDYNlNUTTlSS21pQmM/edit
* GloVe model: http://nlp.stanford.edu/data/glove.6B.zip
* Urban Dictionary word2vec model: https://data.world/jaredfern/urban-dictionary-embedding

The model that you need to use depends on the application that you have in mind.

> We can easily find already trained models for word2vec or Glove easily. However, you may need to develop/train the model from corpus at hand if you have a very specific application field in mind. For example, Google's word2vec model was trained with entire Wikipedia corpus. The basic idea is similar to n-gram approach that means we need a group of words at a time to get idea of the context of the use of the word. Here, I show a general step through approach for training your word embedding model in Gensim, a more matured natural language processing framework than natural language toolkit (NLTK) that comes readily with python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can easily find already trained models for word2vec or Glove. However, you may need to develop/train the model from corpus at hand if you have a very specific application field in mind. For example, Google's word2vec model was trained with entire Wikipedia corpus. The basic idea is similar to n-gram approach that means we need a group of words at a time to get idea of the context of the use of the word. Here, I show a general step through approach for training your word embedding model in Gensim, a more matured natural language processing framework than natural language toolkit (NLTK) that comes readily with python.
```

```python
sentences = 'This is a small corpora'	#assume we fit all our corpus in a variable in memory
model = Word2Vec(sentences)

words = list(model.wv.vocab)	#vocabulary of the corpora
model.wv.save_word2vec_format('my_word_embedding_model', binary = True)
```

We can load a pre-trained model by using:

```python
model = Word2Vec.load('my_word_embedding_model')
```

If we have a group of words meaning similar thing and we know only one or two meaning the opposite, word embedding models can find the similar words; that can even specialized for our problem context if we chose to train our own word embedding models.

> Upto this point we have talking about how we can use words or synonyms of words to perform natural language processing tasks. These sort of approaches work better with naive Bayes distribution model when the vocabulary for problem space is known and predefined. In case where we do not want our system to be limited by the EXACT words in the corpus rather we want to have an overall idea about the way of expression or conveying of information, we use sentiment analysis. Sentiment analysis being a popular technique comes readily with python NLTK library. Besides, a good number of resouces can be found on the internet about it. In this report, we will discuss a relatively new approach called tone analysis. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upto this point I have talked about how we can use words or synonyms of words to perform natural language processing tasks. These sort of approaches work better with naive Bayes distribution model when the vocabulary for problem space is known and predefined. In case where we do not want our system to be limited by the EXACT words in the corpus rather we want to have an overall idea about the way of expression or conveying of information, we use sentiment analysis. Sentiment analysis being a popular technique comes readily with python NLTK library. Besides, a good number of resources can be found on the internet about it. In this report, we will discuss a relatively new approach called tone analysis. 
```

			row.append(cls)
	print(len(row))
	all_data.append(row)
```

In my research, I had text data of two different categories. I calculated the emotions, language, and social scores of those documents using IBM Tone Analyzer. I used these scores to see if there is any statistical differences among the scores of the documents of different classes using Student's t-test.

# Student t-test

Let me start by telling a story. There was a person named William Sealy Gosset. He worked at Guiness Brewery over one hundred years ago. He came up with a statistical test to show the difference between barley yield from two fields. When he wanted to publish the test, he was nervous, and instead of publishing it in his name, he used the pseudonym 'Student'. To this day, this test is known as Student's t-test instead of Gosset's t-test.

# What is t-test?
Imagine, you have two fields of same crops - field 1 and field 2. Maybe you want to compare the productions of these two fields with respect to a certain criteria. However, obviously it's not wise to cut the crops from the whole fields for this. A test on samples from both these fields should be enough. Look at the following image:

> ![Different distributions from two fields](/images/ttest.jpg)

Reviewer: Put the image in the correct folder. See the other posts for an example.

*Image collected from: http://www.socialresearchmethods.net/kb/stat_t.htm*

The top figure says that field 2 (indicated by blue line) has a higher mean than field 1 (indicated by green curve). But that just says a partial story. The fields can have different distributions as shown in the other two figures. Depending on that, the crops from these two fields can have statistical differences or not. And that's where t-test becomes useful. We can see the t-value as a ratio between signal and noise. Signal means the numbers that can show the differences in two distributions, if any, and noise means the numbers that are just outliers. We can define signal as difference between group means and noise is the variability in the groups.

The formula that we are going to use:

> t-value = |mean of field 1 - mean of field 2|/(variance of field 1/sample count of field 1 + variance of field 2/sample count of field 2)^0.5

Reviewer: Take a look at this and let me know if you want to give it a try:

- https://zishuaiz.github.io/blog/how-to-enable-mathjax-in-github-pages
- https://sgeos.github.io/github/jekyll/2016/08/21/adding_mathjax_to_a_jekyll_github_pages_blog.html

If not, I will try sometime next week.

> A sample calculation is shown in the following google sheet: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1H8ajhRR5SOqkcx3pBPHjA1LY76j8-mtNDsnGajFBrXM/edit?usp=sharing

Reviewer: Instead of having the Google sheet link, turn that sheet into a HTML table. This should help:
https://www.tablesgenerator.com/markdown_tables

The t-value here is 2.3 that means there is more signal than noise.

If we had a null hypothesis: "There is no statistically significant difference between the samples." That means any difference we find is just by chance. Hence, we need a critical value. If the our t-value is less than that we cannot reject the null hypothesis however if it is higher, we can reject the hypothesis and accept the alternative hypothesis.

Now, let's look at the t-value table.

> ![t-value table](/images/ttable.png)

Reviewer: Move image to correct directory.
